First draft of the CIP on Certification Metadata (#18)
input-output-hk/Certification-working-group: Metadata/CIP-Certification-Metadata.md

<!-- A clear explanation that introduces the reason for a proposal, its use cases and stakeholders. If the CIP changes an established design then it must outline design issues that motivate a rework. For complex proposals, authors must write a Cardano Problem Statement (CPS) as defined in CIP-9999 and link to it as the `Motivation`. -->

It is expected that evidence of various kinds of assurance of DApps is recorded in an immutable and verifiable way on the Cardano blockchain; these forms of assurance are: automated testing, including property-based testing (level 1), audit (level 2) and formal verification (level 3).

The metadata should be discoverable by all certification stakeholders, including end-users, DApp developers, and ecosystem components, such as light wallets and DApp stores. Information should be indexable by certification provider, DApp developer, DApp and DApp version.

### Use-cases and Stakeholders
DApp developers will seek certification from one of the providers, according to their desired level of certification and will refer to the certificate on several platforms (e.g. on their website or in their DApp registration on a DApp store).

> Certification is to be provided by certification providers including: testing services (level 1), auditors (level 2), and verification services (level 3). Certification providers will issue these certificates refering to a particular version of a DApp that has succesfully gone through a certification process. 

Reviewer: I would refine the notion of successfully going through a certification process. Usually, audits will yield findings that should be addressed afterwards.

Author: That's a good point but I think this should be defined in a certification standard. This on-chain certificate should only be the result of a succesful certification process no matter what it means at the end.

DApp stores and light wallets will be able to pull DApps information from DApps registration or chain exploring and will link a DApp to a corresponding set of certificates.

End-user will interact with a DApp through a wallet and will be able to check the different certificates obtained by the DApp.

## Specification
<!-- The technical specification should describe the proposed improvement in sufficient technical detail. In particular, it should provide enough information that an implementation can be performed solely on the basis of the design in the CIP. This is necessary to facilitate multiple, interoperable implementations. -->

### Certification providers

> Certification providers will present which level of certification was reached and present evidence of the work done. Certification providers will sign the certificate to attest that they have done the work and prevent certificate forgeries.

Reviewer: We should refine what it means to sign a certificate:
- should the party sign a message prior to putting it onchain with a crypto key?
- should the party sign the transaction that will create the utxo containing the certificate?

Author: That's a good point. I think either signing the transaction, but that would mean having a "certification" wallet for each auditor or just signing the content in the metadata. I went with the latter in the new version of the CIP that I will push soon but I'm definitely open to both solutions.

Reviewer 2: To be clear, in this second option, it does not matter what wallet signs the transaction as long as the metadata are signed by a cryptographic key known to be associated to an auditor?

Author: Yeah exactly. So it could be send by the auditor, the DApp developer or any third parties

Reviewer 2: Sounds fine by me.

Reviewer 2: Although I do have one question: we happen to be on a blockchain that has native support for signatures and such; what's the motivation behind the decision to not use that native support but to use another level of signatures instead? Could the metadata file be stored elsewhere as well, eg. on IPFS?

Author: Yes having the auditor directly sign the transaction is the other choice. I picked the same one as registration did but both solutions are fine by me.

### Definitions

> - **dApp** - A decentralised application that is described by the combination of metadata, certificate and a set of used scripts.

Reviewer: Should we explicitly mention minting policies or are they included into scripts by default?

Author: Good point. I think we need to be more explicit and include them into scripts.

- **dApp Store** - A dApp aggregator application which follows on-chain data looking for and verifying dApp metadata claims, serving their users linked dApp metadata.

> ### Properties

Reviewer: What about putting these fields as an array with:
- field name
- type
- mandatory?
- depiction

Reviewer 2: Seeing that this comment led to confusion, let me rephrase. What about describing these properties in a Markdown table, with four columns, one for field name, one for type, one for whether it is mandatory and one for a description of the entry. For instance:

```markdown
| Field name                 | Type                        | Mandatory? | Description
|----------------------------|-----------------------------|------------|---------------
| `subject`                  | UTF-8 encoded string        | Yes        | Identifier of the claim subject (i.e dApp)
| `type`                     | JSON object                 | Yes        | The type of the claim
| `type.action`              | `CERTIFY` or `AUDIT`        | Yes        | The action that the certificate is asserting. In the case of `CERTIFY`, the certificate is asserting that the dApp is being certified. In the case of `AUDIT`, the certificate is asserting that an audit has been performed for this DApp. `AUDIT` shall come with a certification level `certificationLevel` of `0`. [IDEA: Revoke? Update?]
| `type.certificationLevel`  | Integer between `0` and `3` | Yes        | The level of certification. `0` is reserved for audits and reports that are not compliant with the certification standards. `1`, `2`, and `3` refer to the certification certificates referring to the three level of certifications as defined by the certification working group.
| `type.certificationIssuer` | UTF-8 encoded string        | Yes        | The name of the certification issuer.
```

I don't know how much better than would be. Alternatively, maybe a list formatted a bit more strictly:

```markdown
- `subject`: Identifier of the claim subject (i.e. dApp).
  - **mandatory**: yes
  - **type**: UTF-8 encoded string

- `type`: The type of the claim.
  - **mandatory**: yes
  - **type**: JSON object

- `type.action`: The action that the certificate is asserting.
  - **mandatory**: yes
  - **type**: `"CERTIFY"` or `"AUDIT"`
  - In the case of `CERTIFY`, the certificate is asserting that the dApp is being certified. In the case of `AUDIT`, the certificate is asserting that an audit has been performed for this DApp. `AUDIT` shall come with a certification level `certificationLevel` of `0`. [IDEA: Revoke? Update?]

- `type.certificationLevel`: Certification level.
  - **mandatory**: yes
  - **type**: integer between 0 and 3
  - 0 is reserved for audits and reports that are not compliant with the certification standards. 1, 2, and 3 refers to the certification certificates referring to the three level of certifications as defined by the certification working group.

- `certificationIssuer`: The name of the certification issuer.
  - **mandatory**: yes
  - **type**: UTF-8 encoded string
```

A pretty visualisation could otherwise simply be generated from the JSON schema.

**subject**, an UTF-8 encoded string, is a mandatory field which is an identifier of the claim subject.

**certLevel**, an integer between 1 and 3, is a mandatory field that represents the level of certification reached in a certificate.

> **certificateIssuer**, a string, is a mandatory field that represents the company that has issued the certificate. It will be used with a public list of public keys to ensure that the certificate originates from a trusted certification provider. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**certificateIssuer**, a string, is a mandatory field that represents the party that has issued the certificate. It will be used with a public list of public keys to ensure that the certificate originates from a trusted certification provider. 
```

> **reportURLs**, an array of URLs, is a mandatory field that link to the actual certification report for anyone to read. This ensures transparency in the findings, what was and was not considered in the certification process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**reportURLs**, an array of URLs, is a field where each link points to the same actual certification report for anyone to read. This ensures transparency in the findings, what was and was not considered in the certification process.
```
Maybe this should not be mandatory. There might not be a report (at all, or yet), depending on the contract between the dApp developer and the certification party. Additionally, links can die.

Author: I don't think there could be a certification with no kind of report to be honnest but I can move that to non-mandatory for the moment.

> **reportHash**, a string, is a mandatory field that is the blake2b-256 hash of the audit file pointed by the links in **reportURLs**. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**reportHash**, a string, is a field that is the blake2b-256 hash of the report pointed by the links in **reportURLs**. 
```

**summaryURLs**, an array of URLs, is a mandatory field that link to the actual certification summary for anyone to read. 

**summaryHash**, a string, is a mandatory field that is the blake2b-256 hash of the summary file pointed by the links in **summaryURLs**. 

**disclaimerURLs**, an array of URLs, is a mandatory field that link to the legal disclaimer about the content of the report pointed by **reportURLs** links.

> **disclaimerHash**, a string, is a mandatory field that is the blake2b-256 hash of the summary file pointed by the links in **disclaimerURLs**. 

Reviewer: Are these fields really necessary? Shouldn't they be embedded in the report? 
Instead, we could have a summary that is a short string summarizing the work that has been conducted. This could be show directly on the dApp store.

Author: They should be embedded into the report in my opinion but there is a demand from DApp store to be able to display them directly at the DApp store level. I don't think we'll be able to standardized the format of the report to a point where they could extract it automatically which is why I made them as fields.

Reviewer 2: In this suggestion, though, they are not embedded in the metadata which only contains a link (or several links) to the summary or the disclaimer. Is the dApp store going to pull those links, hoping one of them resolves, and show the result? Does that imply constraints on what's at the end of the link (as in plain text for instance, with a size limit)?

Author: I moved those to strings. Thanks for the suggestion.

> **scriptHashes**, containing an ordered list of all scripts that make the DApp, is a mandatory field which can be used as a link to the actual DApp running on-chain.

Author: The idea behind ordering them is to make it easy to compare them with registration metadata versions for example. But this is not really useful so I changed to an array and I removed the ordering.

The certificate issuer needs to be able to compute the script hash and script address. My understanding was that it only requires the parameters to be instantiated and the full compilation chain which is not too much to request when getting certified.

Parametrized scripts is still a challenge with this version of metadata description.

                        "type": "string"
                    },
                    "compilerVersion": {
                        "type": "string"
                    },
                    "optimizer": {
                        "type": "string"
                    },
                    "optimizerVersion": {
                        "type": "string"
                    },
                    "progLang": {
                        "type": "string"
                    },
                    "repository": {
                        "type": "string"
                    }
                }
            }
            "fullScriptHash": {
              "type": "string"
            },
            "scriptHash": {
              "type": "string"
            },
            "contractAddress": {
              "type": "string"
            }
            "required": [
                "fullScriptHash",
                "scriptHash",
                "contractAddress"
              ]
        }
      ]
    }
  },

  "required": [
    "subject",
    "schemeVersion",
    "certificationLevel",
    "certificateIssuer",
    "report",
    "summary",
    "disclaimer",
    "scripts"
  ]

> }
> 
> ```

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
}
```
````

        }
  ]
}
```

[TO DISCUSS: Verification tools, how do we represent that? with versions, compilation options]

The metadata should be discoverable by all certification stakeholders, including end-users, DApp developers, and ecosystem components, such as light wallets and DApp stores. Information should be indexable by certification issuer, DApp developer, DApp and DApp version.

It should be possible for there to be multiple versions of metadata published by the same certification issuer for the same version of a DApp, particularly when a (minor) update of the evidence is necessary. In such a case it should be possible to identify the most recent version of the report for that DApp version. It will also be the case that the same DApp may have certification metadata provided by multiple different certification issuers.

It should be possible for wallets to identify to users the certification status of a DApp when they are signing a transaction that is being submitted to a deployed DApp.

### Custom fields
Certification issuers should be free to add additional fields to fit some additional needs.

### Certification issuers

> | Certification issuer | URL                | Contact email        | Certification levels | Public key                                |
> |----------------------|-----               |---------------       |----------------------|------------                               |
> | Example Ltd.         | http://example.com | contact@example.com  | 1,2                  | EXAMPLEPUBLICKEYPGPED25519 (PGP, ed25519) |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Certification issuer | URL                | Contact email        | Certification levels | Cardano address |
|----------------------|-----               |---------------       |----------------------|------------   |
| Example Ltd.         | http://example.com | contact@example.com  | 1,2                  | EXAMPLEADDRESS  |
```

 
## Rationale: how does this CIP achieve its goals?

An on-chain solution is preferred as it allows for it to be checkable by any stakeholder and immutable.

Certificate are issued by certification issuers that sign the certificate to prevent certificate forgeries.
This design allows for anyone to issue certificates as long as they sign it but stakeholders are then free to maintain a list of the trusted certification issuers.

These certificates are self-standing and can be presented as-is by any stakeholder.

This proposal does not affect any backward compatibility of existing solution but is based on the work done for CIP72 on DApp registration and Discovery. It is also linked to CIP52 on Cardano audit best practices guidelines.

### Other designs considered
**Updates to registration entries**

> This would have required DApp owner or certification issuers to add certificates to every registration making it harder to maintain a shared state between all stakeholders. The chosen design requires to follow the chain to discover the certificates which should be expected from stakeholders.

Reviewer 2: These two lines will appear after one another in HTML, and therefore we should have a separator. A colon maybe?
